% Translating an Electronic Clincal Quality Measure for Cancer Diagnosis Quality to a Novel Data Source

Andrew J. Zimolzak, Jessica Davila, Hardeep Singh

Due May 2. SIDM scientific abstracts are 400 words (really 2800
characters). Title 100 characters max. Optional: one figure or table
(upload) if abstract is 350 words or less.

# Abstract

Background: Missed and delayed cancer diagnoses are common, harmful,
and often preventable. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
have emphasized digital quality measures (dQMs) that evaluate
longitudinal electronic health record data across multiple settings of
care to address measurement gaps in quality. Therefore, dQMs of cancer
diagnosis quality are necessary to identify gaps and guide
interventions. We previously developed one for cancer emergency
presentation. This is a unique measure because it focuses on diagnosis
specifically. We developed and validated it in two health systems but
aimed to demonstrate its usability and value in other large US data
sources.

Methods: We implemented an dQM in Cosmos, a deidentified database
covering x million individuals. The interface is point and click
instead of SQL, which required using the original source document
English language description, a previously published approach that has
worked. We measured the crude measure nationwide in those with new
lung cancer diagnosis in calendar year 2019. Emergency presentation
was defined as ER visit followed by the new cancer diagnosis within 30
days. We examined associations with social determinants of health both
from survey and census ZIP code level data. We examined previous
associations with demographic factors.

Results: At national scale, the dQM for lung EP was 19.5% (out of
58,274 cancer diagnoses). This is similar to prior values (19% VA and
18% Geisinger). Survey data showed an association of EP with
transportation to medical appointments (43% vs. 28%). There was a
stepwise association of more EP with each increasing category of
social vulnerability (18% at lowest category vs. 22% at highest,
p<0.001). Income showed a stepwise decrease in EP with increasing ZIP
per capita income (p < 0.001). Demographics showed 19% EP in white
patients and 24% in black (the two most common categories). Age < 69
had higher EP (23%) compared to 78 and above (17%, p<0.001).

Conclusions: We successfully implemented an dQM using a different
platform for US medical record data. We validated previous demographic
associations shown in separate datasets. We showed associations with
social determinants data that were not available elsewhere and can be
further investigated. Limitations include the inability to
conclusively re-validate this measure due to deidentified data and no
access to text notes, although this could be done at any single
institution that wanted to implement the measure.
